[docs/collector/building] add more context for what you can build (#4343)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/building/_index.md

title: Building custom components
description: Instructions on how to build your own collector components
weight: 90
cSpell:ignore: mdatagen ottl
---

The OpenTelemetry Collector can not only be extended by existing components, but
also by custom components, that you develop and build on your own. Here you will
find instructions on how to build some of those components. For additional
details take a look into the documents contained within the
[opentelemetry-collector-contrib repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/README.md).

There are several

> [classes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/67d37183e6ac9b7180fefc6dc3a55f2a75c12fba/cmd/mdatagen/main.go#L192)

Reviewer: I would link to our documentation, I don't think a link to mdatagen's internals is the right approach here
```suggestion
[classes](/docs/collector/configuration/#basics)
```

Reviewer: I don't think we should link at mdatagen at all. The fact that we use mdatagen is an implementation detail: we do not require for you to use mdatagen to create a new component: you just need a `go.mod` and a properly-typed `NewFactory` function and the builder can take it.

of OpenTelemetry components, such as

- `receivers`: Scrapers and Listeners which
  [ingest data](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver#readme),
  typically used to convert data from an external source to OTLP
- `exporters`: Ways to
  [export data](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/exporter#readme)
  to non-OTLP formats, vendor-specific backends, or other Observability tools
- `processors`: Ways to
  [process data](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/processor#readme)
  in a pipeline
- `connectors`:
  [Connects](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/connector#readme)
  the output (exporter) of one pipeline to the input (receiver) of another in a
  single component
- `extensions`: Ways to
  [augment the collector runtime](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/extension/README.md),

>   such as providing

Reviewer: This duplicates https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#basics, doesn't it_

Reviewer: Sorry, it's still unclear to me what the audience and intent of this doc is. Is it for people building their custom components? Is it a "how to add your component to contrib"? Is it "how to contribute to the opentelemetry-collector and/or opentelemetry-collector-contrib repositories"?

  [health checks](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/extension/healthcheckextension/README.md)

> - `cmd`: Commands for building and/or maintain the collector

Reviewer 2: I mean specifically this item, `cmd`.

> - `pkg`:

Reviewer 2: We don't have support for adding `pkg` in `ocb` at this point.

  [Packages](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Aopen-telemetry+%22class%3A+pkg%22&type=code)
  for adding functionality to the collector, such as support for
  [golden tests](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/golden#readme)
  or

>   [OTTL functions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl#readme)

Reviewer: I am against promoting the usage of the `pkg` folder outside of contrib in our public documentation. I don't think we have figured out our strategy here yet

> Most components are registered using

Reviewer 2: This is only relevant if people are adding components to contrib. Perhaps this doc needs to be clearer on what's the target audience? Am I reading this because I'm developing a proprietary component to be used with my own distribution, used internally at my company? Or is this about developing an open-source component that is meant to be distributed as part of contrib? I would say that this doc is for the first case, and would expect people to check the contribution guidelines in contrib if they are looking for the second case.

Reviewer 2: > They might end up in the contrib repository, but I argue that there are many use cases were folks want to have their "own" thing that might not even be OSS.

I'll let @svrnm confirm, but I believe the focus should be those many use cases where folks want to have their "own" thing. We can keep contrib off this doc, as it would make it a lot simpler, while still pointing people to the contrib-specific guidelines at that repo.

Reviewer 3: I thought about this, and sorry if this is different to what we have discussed before, but I lean towards "making it a lot simpler", so keeping things out of the docs that are contrib-specific. If we think that they would add additional value, we can still add them in later as well.

find instructions on how to build some of those components. For additional
details take a look into the documents contained within the
[opentelemetry-collector-contrib repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/README.md).

> There are several [classes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/cmd/mdatagen/main.go#L184) of opentelemetry components, such as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are several [classes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/cmd/mdatagen/main.go#L184) of OpenTelemetry components, such as
```

- `receivers` (scrapers and listeners to ingest data)
- `exporters` (ways to export data to vendors or other tooling)
- `processors` (ways to process data in a pipeline)
- `connectors` (ways to [connect pipelines](./connector/) and form a [DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) for your data pipeline)
- `extensions` (ways to [augment the collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/extension/README.md), such as [health checks](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/extension/healthcheckextension/README.md))
- `cmd` (commands)

> - `pkg` (packages)

Reviewer 4: Consider reformatting the list so that it reads like this:

```
- `receivers`: Scapers and listeners to ingest data
```

And so on.

> Most components are registered via [`mdatagen`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/mdatagen), a tool which will auto generate some code specifying the adoption status (stability) of your component along with documentation and component specific information. Most significantly, `mdatagen` configuration is used to configure the out-of-the-box metrics for scraping receivers, and which are enabled by default for collection.

Reviewer 3: add a cspell ignore for `mdatagen` to the front matter of that page (look into other markdown files how this can be accomplished)

> Most components are registered via [`mdatagen`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/mdatagen), a tool which will auto generate some code specifying the adoption status (stability) of your component along with documentation and component specific information. Most significantly, `mdatagen` configuration is used to configure the out-of-the-box metrics for scraping receivers, and which are enabled by default for collection.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most components are registered using [`mdatagen`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/mdatagen), a tool which automatically generates code that specifies the adoption
status (stability) of your component along with documentation and component specific information. Most significantly, `mdatagen` configuration is used to describe out-of-the-box metrics for scraping receivers, and which metrics are enabled by default for collection.
```

The core [`opentelemetry-collector`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/README.md) is the basis for all opentelemetry components and collector development. For specific, non-universal integrations, contributors look to the [`-contrib`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/README.md) repository for all but the most generic integrations, and vendors often base their distributions off of the `-contrib` repository.

> Note that [adding a component](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#adding-new-components) to the `-contrib` distribution incurs a high bar of support, and while contributions of new components are encouraged, adoption is a process that requires ongoing support and commitment to the opentelemetry project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that [adding a component](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#adding-new-components) to the `-contrib` distribution incurs a high bar of support, and while contributions of new components are encouraged, adoption is a process that requires ongoing support and commitment to the OpenTelemetry project.
```

> If you wish to [build your own distribution](../custom-collector/) of the collector, you may use the [`ocb`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/builder) tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you wish to build your own [distribution](../distributions/) of the collector, you may use the [`OpenTelemetry Collector builder`](../custom-collector).
```

find instructions on how to build some of those components. For additional
details take a look into the documents contained within the
[opentelemetry-collector-contrib repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/README.md).

There are several
[classes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/cmd/mdatagen/main.go#L184)
of OpenTelemetry components, such as

> - `receivers` Scrapers and Listeners to ingest data

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `receivers` Scrapers and Listeners to ingest data, typically used to convert data from an external source to OTLP
```

> - `exporters` Ways to export data to vendors or other tooling

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `exporters` Ways to export data to non-OTLP formats, vendor-specific backends, or other Observability tools
```

- `processors` Ways to process data in a pipeline
- `connectors` Ways to [connect pipelines](./connector/) and form a
  [DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) for your data

>   pipeline

Reviewer 5: Hmmm, I don't think people will really understand why having a DAG is helpful? I'd propose maybe something about "simplfying" the pipeline instead
